Pushkin.
Hello. Hello. Malcolm here. Before we
get to the episode, I want to let you
know you can get this entire season now
adree by subscribing to Revisionist
History on Pushkin Plus. Sign up on the
show page on Apple Podcasts or at
pushkin.fm/plus.
Pushkin Plus subscribers can access ad
free episodes, full audio books,
exclusive binges, and bonus content for
all Pushkin shows.
[Music]
>> Previously on Revisionist History,
>> 35 years. That's how long Elizabeth's
family waited for justice to occur.
>> He backhanded his child. I don't know
what the child had done. You just don't
do that to a child across its face.
>> 35 long years.
>> And I answered the call and I got all
the information on who done it, who was
all involved, and all the particulars.
>> The viciousness was there that he could
do something like that. I don't know.
[Music]
When Elizabeth Senate was murdered,
Patterson Hood, one of the lead singers
of the legendary southern rock band, The
Drive by Truckers, was living in the
Scholes. Obviously, it was the big front
page story for, you know, weeks because
it was such a a horrific grizzly murder
and all of the different as as more
details started coming out about it, you
know, it just kept getting worse and
worse.
>> He was 24, working at a pharmacy in
Florence, looking for a way out.
>> They closed the Ford plant in 1982,
which was the year I graduated from high
school. And when it was gone, not only
was it gone, but then all these other
businesses that depended on people who
made the money working at the Ford
plant, that stuff started going. It's
really bounced back in the last last 15
20 years. The the town's almost
unrecognizable because of all the really
positive things that have happened. But
in ' 88, it was pretty [__] grim.
>> Years went by and the story of what
happened to Elizabeth Senate stayed with
him. I don't know why it resonated with
me, but I first started writing it
thinking in terms of writing it more as
like a a a short story or a book or
something like that. And I kind of wrote
it in that form and then at some point
started turning it into a song.
>> The song was called The Fireplace Poker.
He released it on the album Go Boots
which came out in 2011. Maybe you've
heard it before.
had his wife done in my
knew in high school. He and a friend
should do her in
make it look like a robber.
[Music]
>> Patterson Hood got his inspiration from
what one of the regulars in that
Florence drugstore, a local police
officer, told him back in 1988.
He was a chief of police in Florence and
so he was all up in any any police
business anywhere in the area whether it
was in his jurisdiction or not. So he
would come in and just talk about stuff
and it was interesting to hear for sure.
He theorized really early on that that
it wasn't like it was like it was
supposed to be looking like it was. What
everyone first thought was that
Elizabeth Senate had been murdered by
two local kids, Kenny Smith and John
Forest Parker. They were the ones who
drove out to Kundog Cemetery Road on
that March morning. It was Parker's
knife found in the pond behind the
house. They confessed they were charged
with capital murder. Everything that
would happen in the Senate case over the
course of the next 35 years, the
controversies, the outrage, the moral
calamity that would ultimately take
place in home and prison was based on
the assumption that the justice system
in Alabama had correctly determined who
was responsible for what happened that
morning. Namely, Charles Sennet was the
mastermind who ordered the hit on his
wife and Parker and Smith were the
killers. But that's not what the
Florence police chief told Patterson
Hood.
>> Home from work.
Found a m dying.
Life was falling from her grasp. Still
she lay there trying.
No one will ever know what she told.
or know what he told her
cuz the river ended his wife and 15 wax
fireplace poker.
The reverend came home from work and
found the misses dying. Life was falling
from her grasp, but still she lay there
trying. No one will ever know what she
told him or know what he told her cuz
the reverend did his wife in 15 wax
fireplace poker.
Wait,
the reverend did his wife in?
[Music]
My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening to my podcast about things
overlooked and misunderstood.
This episode of the Alabama murders is
about the trial of John Forest Parker,
one of the three young men charged in
the killing of Elizabeth Sennet and all
of the ways that the catastrophe that
unfolded in the Scholes, the failure
cascade set in motion by the murder
could have been averted. The
counterfactual version of events, the
whatifs.
Episode three, a peculiar institution.
[Music]
I've had, you know, other cases that
technically were probably factually more
complex, but this is Yeah, this is the
one that I will
is still on my on even without job
coming.
>> Tom Heftlin was John Forest Parker's
attorney. He remembers exactly where he
was the day Elizabeth Senate was
murdered. I had been to Red Bay,
Alabama, which is on the Mississippi
border down the same highway where this
happened. I may well have seen
John Forest Parker and Kenny Smith in
their car. I don't know that for a fact,
but I may well have. Then I got the call
that the court was going to appoint me
and Gene Hanby to represent him.
>> He is the son of the former US senator
from Alabama, Howell Heftlin. In his
living room, Heftlin has a portrait of
his famous father and father and son
look very much alike. The Heftlland have
large leonine heads and a kind of
rumbling southern gravitas. So you were
courtappointed attorneys.
>> Quarterappointed attorneys.
>> Yeah. Yeah. How much of your practice
would have been that kind of work in
those days?
>> Zero. This is unusual.
>> Mhm.
>> What? So why what how did it come about
then?
>> Uh I think we'd had a string of capital
murder cases and you know everybody kind
of is expected to serve.
Parker's trial took place in May of 1989
at the Cobra County Courthouse, a
graceful white neocclassical building on
the town square in the center of
Tuscumbia.
>> All right, we're at the Cobra County
Courthouse. If we look across, uh, you
see a three-story
building with a razor wire around it and
a fence. That's the county jail.
>> He gave my colleague Benedafhrey a tour
of the courthouse. Well, we don't have
full light. So, let's see.
>> The courtroom was small, gray and white.
On the wall, there's a portrait of the
judge in the Parker case. Enga Johnson,
long blonde hair, blue eyes.
>> So, where where did you guys sit?
>> There.
>> And so, the jury box. That's
interesting. It sort of faces the judge.
>> Yeah.
>> Jury box is there. Witness would be
there.
Court clerk over there. Obviously, judge
court reporter here
>> like some of the jurors would have had
like a direct view of John like from
feet away.
>> Yeah, he would have been probably we
probably would have sat him there. I
think we did.
>> Well, because
>> inside where we block him off to a
certain extent.
>> Why do you want to block him off?
>> Well, he is shackled.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, uh
that's basically I just don't want to
emphasize that he is a prisoner at that
point. Even there by nose he is.
>> Most criminal trials, particularly older
ones, don't have an audio or video
record. There's just a transcript
created by the court reporter. The
transcripts can run for thousands of
pages, and they're their own unique
literary form. Because there's no
description or elaboration or context,
they read as flat, benol. It takes a
little bit of time to learn how to use
your imagination to fill in the empty
spaces. And in the case of John Parker,
what becomes clear when you learn how to
fill in those empty spaces is that the
prosecution's case was really, really
weak.
The state's problem started with Parker
sitting there in the docket a few feet
from the jurors. This was a case about a
murder for hire, a contract killer, and
he just didn't look the part of a
contract killer.
>> Tell us about Parker.
>> Parker was like 18,
uh, actually a good family,
uh, solid people. He had had some prior
childhood trauma that I think probably
created a little mental. He had some
drug problems.
Tell me more about your impressions of
him.
>> A kid who had been drugged out and
didn't know what they were doing. John
Force Parker had been arrested on
multiple occasions for minor crimes,
breaking into cars, stealing gas. He'd
failed 9th grade three times. In one of
his psychiatric evaluations done after
one of his previous arrests, there's
this quote. John's childhood history
includes a brain concussion at the age
of two. He reportedly was unconscious
for 36 hours following his concussion.
His parents reported that due to his
brain concussion, they had not expected
very much of John.
On the drive to Kundog Cemetery Road on
the morning of Elizabeth Senate's
murder, Parker and Smith had a bottle of
whiskey between them on the front seat.
Parker injected himself with a healthy
dose of opioids on the way over. Charles
Senate gave them some money to buy a
gun. They used it to buy drugs instead.
In every description of the crime, they
come across as completely clueless.
Parker is 19, Smith, 22. They're so
lacadasical that after beating and
stabbing Elizabeth Senate, they threw
the knife and the walking stick they
used into the pond behind her house when
there are literally thousands of acres
of wooded wilderness on the drive back
home where something could be thrown
away and it would never ever be found.
Yes, Parker and Smith hurt Elizabeth
Senate badly and took money to commit
acts of violence. But when we hear the
phrase contract killers, we think of
assassins, mafia hitmen, stone cold,
hard-bitten, lethal. These were screwed
up kids.
One of the biggest points of weakness
for the prosecution emerged in the
testimony of the surgeon who was on duty
at Helen Keller Hospital when Elizabeth
Senate was brought into the ER, David
Parks McKinley. He was the one who first
saw her injuries, who tried to save her
life, who pronounced her dead. The
direct examination by the prosecutor is
brief and to the point. The police had
found a knife, a hunting knife, in the
pond behind the Senate House. This was a
knife that both Smith and Parker
admitted to bringing with them to Kundog
Cemetery Road. The prosecution just
wanted to establish the connection
between that knife and Elizabeth
Senate's death.
Question. Doctor, can you tell us what
you recall about her physical
appearance? Answer: The most striking
thing was multiple stab wounds,
particularly over the right side of the
chest and at the base of the neck. There
were also some wounds of the forehead
and scalp. McKinley testified that the
cuts on the forehead and scalp looked
like they were from a blunt object. The
wounds to the chest and neck were caused
by a knife. He went on to say, "It is
likely that the chest wounds were by and
large the cause of her death."
Prosecutor, thank you, doctor. That's
all.
Halfl knew the prosecution was calling
McKinley, so he did a little homework
beforehand. We're starting trial on the
Tuesday following Memorial Day.
I know they're calling
state medical examiner was coming up
testify what the fatal wounds were,
describe them. Then they were bringing
the doctor who treat her at the
emergency room there and I called up the
doctor and said, "What are you going to
say tomorrow?"
Now we talked about it and visited. Kind
of knew each other.
>> What the doctor told him made Hlin
realize he could lay a trap. So in
court, Heftlin gets up and in
cross-examination asks McKinley about
the knife.
Question: Have you ever been shown the
knife that the state removed from the
pond in this case? Answer: I have not
seen it. No, sir. He turns to the
prosecutors. Do you all have the knife?
This is one of those moments when the
transcript is of little help. You have
to fill in the empty space. The
prosecutors are anxious. They thought
the identity of the murder weapon was a
settled fact. So why does Heftlin want
McKinley to see it? They hesitate. The
judge immediately intervenes. Can I see
y'all at the bench? Both sides huddle
with the judge. The judge says to Hein,
"Do you just want to show him the
knife?" He says, "Uh-huh." The judge
turns to the prosecutor. Why don't you
get it? More hesitation from the
prosecutors. The judge repeats herself.
Y'all go get it. The prosecutors rummage
in their evidence box. Take it out. He
hands it to the doctor. I asked Hein to
read aloud from the trial transcripts
from the crucial moment of his exchange
with McKinley.
>> You saw the wounds inflicted on Miss
Senate Fresh when she came in hospital,
didn't you? Yes, sir. I said, "Examining
that knife, do you have any opinion
whether or not that was the instrument
that could have inflicted those wounds?"
>> And McKinley answers simply,
>> "I would frankly be surprised. This was
the knife based on what I saw or the
sharp object based on what I saw on the
patient.
I don't have any further questions."
The government's own witness testifies
that the alleged murder weapon isn't
actually the murder weapon. The chest
wounds are of a much smaller knife.
>> Yes.
>> Than than was the ne the neck wounds are
consistent with the large knife that
Yes.
>> Kenny and John have. The chest wounds,
which are the fatal wounds, seem to be
made by a smaller knife, and we can't
find the smaller knife.
>> That's right.
From there, you would think the
reasonable doubts grow. Were Kenny Smith
and John Parker actually the ones who
stabbed Elizabeth Senate to death? The
pathologist who conducted the autopsy on
Elizabeth Senate's body testifies. She
described Senate's chest wounds as
rapidly fatal. When asked about this by
prosecutors, she said bluntly, "I don't
think she lived very long after those
wounds were inflicted." Once again, one
of the government's own witnesses
undermines their case. Think about the
timing.
At 11:44 in the morning, Charles Senate
calls Ronnie May in hysterics to report
that his wife has been attacked. At
12:15, the paramedics discover that
Elizabeth Senate has a pulse. At 1:00
p.m., she arrives at Helen Keller
Hospital and she's still alive.
McKinley, in fact, doesn't pronounce her
as dead until 2:05. a full hour later.
But according to the prosecution's own
witness, John Parker and Kenny Smith
were back home in Florence by 11:30 that
morning. It's a 30 to 40minute drive
from Kundog Cemetery Road to Florence,
and it's pouring rain outside. The
timing doesn't work. They must have left
the Senate's house by at least 11:00.
There's no way Parker and Smith could
have inflicted rapidly fatal wounds at
midm morning if she was still alive at
2:00 in the afternoon. Meaning Smith and
Parker must have been long gone by the
time the fatal wounds were inflicted.
[Music]
Later in the trial, another pathologist
who had examined the Senate autopsy made
the same point. Here is Heftlin
questioning him. Question. If the
evidence in this case shows that the
Cherokee Rescue Squad detected a
heartbeat on Mrs. Senate at
approximately 12:15 p.m. on March the
18th, 1988. Based upon your years of
experience as a pathologist and your
review of the exhibits that you just
named, do you have an opinion as to what
time prior to 12:15 p.m. the fatal
wounds were delivered? Answer: Within a
very few minutes.
The judge, the jury, the lawyers on both
sides, the journalists covering the
trial are all listening to this
testimony with its unmistakable
implication.
Someone else must have stabbed Elizabeth
Senate in the chest with a smaller
knife. And who was the only person at
the house at the time of the 911 call?
Charles Senate. If Senate does it, the
timing makes a lot more sense. He shows
up after they've left.
>> Stabs, calls.
>> Stabs, and calls. Yeah.
>> Or even had called in and then
>> Yeah.
>> A knife that doesn't fit. A timeline
that makes no sense. And if the jury
still had any lingering doubts about
Charles Sennet's culpability, there was
also what they heard from Elizabeth
Senate's friend, who had a front row
seat to the inner life of her marriage.
That's after the break.
Susan Mosley was a nurse at a weight
loss clinic in Muscle Scholes. Elizabeth
Sennet was one of her patients
>> and I noticed
she was extremely quiet, introverted.
um low self-esteem
but was a brilliant brilliant woman.
>> Mosley sat down with a local reporter
named Lee Hedgeb who has written about
the Senate case and did some interviews
for us. She shared with him what she
remembered about Elizabeth in the months
leading up to the murder. So she would
come once a week to the clinic and I
would go I would weigh her to her blood
pressure, talk to her about, okay, how's
your weight doing?
>> Mosy said that Elizabeth Senate didn't
seem happy. She would sit in the waiting
room with a napkin crushed in her fist.
One day, Mosie decided to confront her,
[Music]
and I said, "Liz, listen to him.
You've been going up and down in your
weight. So, I'm going to close this
chart.
Oh, I'm just going to turn around. I'm
going to shut my eyes, take a deep
breath. And I want you to close your
eyes
and just tell me
what you think
is the biggest problem. If you eat
potato chips like I do every night,
we'll get baked ones or we will do
something. So, just let me know. And I
heard I nearly open my eyes and I heard
the chair rustle. And I still felt it
shut. And she said, "Hey,
open your eyes." She said, "Turn around
here." And I'll never forget. I turned
to my left. I turned around like this.
And she was standing there. And I'm
going to tell you before we go any
further. I'm going to She got her brows.
I pulled it down
from about an inch
above.
[Music]
When a short sleeve would come,
all in her chest,
in her
butts, her legs to a certain area where
a skirt would come
was black.
black.
This Senate was covered in bruises.
>> I got up and out of this whole bed. I
didn't ask no questions. I didn't ask
anything. I had to button her little
thing back up and I go like that and she
sat down.
Do you want to talk about this?
And she began to tell me this story
about our relationship
with Mr.
She began to tell me
that she was didn't know how, but that
he was going to kill her and that she
knew this and she had been saving her
money
for the boys
and we were able to tell Tony she was
one day charge of $400.
She said, "I worried about this and
worried about this once. I'll do this.
Be the woman's sister."
She said, "I know.
I don't think I'll ever be free before
he kills me.
She didn't know how, but he was going to
kill her, and she didn't think she could
break free.
Mosy said she tried to help Elizabeth to
find a way to leave Charles, leave the
marriage. She told Elizabeth, "You can
come and live with me if you want." She
tried to help her find the words to
communicate to her husband it had to
end.
We would sit there and I would I would
limit me right off the thing and say,
"Okay, now say this,
Charles, we need to talk.
I cannot continue to do go over with all
these beatings and then go to church on
Sunday and try to cover our fathers,
wear a long sleeve shirt
and 100° out. Somebody is going to
figure this out. I can't continue to do
this."
Mosley gave a deposition to
investigators and her testimony was
recounted to the jury by Ronnie May from
the Colbert County Sheriff's Office in
the flat effectless tone of official
speak. But even then, it's impossible to
miss the power of what she saw. Listen,
this is what May said.
Mrs. Mosley said that she had been told
by Mrs. Senate that around Christmas of
that year, Charles's family came to
visit and they had come up from Florida.
Mrs. Senate stated that some of the
family went hunting. She stated that
Charles became extremely upset over some
conversation between he and members of
the family, and Mrs. Senate stated that
during that outburst at Christmas with
his family members, he laid down on the
floor and screamed and cried and seemed
to be paralyzed at different times.
Mrs. Senate stated that this went on for
some time at the house and as a result
Charles's family left and returned to
Florida. Mrs. Mosley stated that Mrs.
Senate told her during this argument
that Charles at one point had pulled and
waved a gun in the direction of his
father.
On one of my visits to the Scholes, I
sat in Tom Hefllin's living room and
tried to make sense of all the things
the jury learned about Charles Sennet,
who had taken his own life so quickly
after his wife's murder. I mean, of of
all of these three potential murderers,
Parker, Smith, and Senate, Senate is the
only one with a documented history of
um of violent, highly aggressive
behavior. He's the one who beat his
wife. To me, this is all about Charles
Senate, the whole thing. He sets the
whole thing in motion.
>> He's the charismatic, persuasive adult
who
>> he he's a predator. He really should be
the one on trial.
>> And
without having gone back, maybe we
didn't try him hard enough.
This, I think, is what was on the police
chief's mind when he gossiped about the
case with Patterson Hood, lead singer of
the Drive by Truckers at that drugstore
in Florence.
>> I can't remember how soon they figured
out that he that, you know, the preacher
had finished the job and all that, but
it was, you know, it was pretty obvious,
pretty quick, you know, that those guys,
they were fuckups. They took what was
going to be a simple go in, you know,
kill her, make it look like a robbery,
and turned it into this gruesome thing,
and she was still alive.
And so the preacher did what, you know,
he then did. And uh I mean it's God it's
just it's just such an awful story on
every imaginable level.
>> Which is why Patterson Hood wrote the
crucial verse
and came home from work
found.
Life was falling from her grasp. Still
she lay there trying.
No one will ever know what she told him
or know what he told her
cuz the river ended his wife and 15 wax
fireplace poker.
To read the John Parker trial transcript
with the full knowledge of what would
happen over the following decades is to
get angry, especially after what
happened next.
The sentencing.
[Applause]
[Music]
>> What was it like when you were
sequestered? We spent eight days over
here in the Ramada in
>> Gary Hyfield, foreman of the jury in the
Parker trial talking to my colleague Ben
Nadaf Hafrey.
>> It was good. I mean, you know, they fed
us and I mean, we got to go home and get
clothes and all that kind of stuff and
then, you know, go down there, but uh
they told us to prepare for clothes for
a week and we got them and, you know,
went to the hotel. I mean, it was all
good. Did you guys hang out when you
were successful?
>> Yeah, we we really they they told us not
to, you know. We just kind of We did get
to go to the pool. We did go to the pool
one day.
>> Highfield was 30 years old at the time,
married, one kid and another on the way.
Sold insurance. He says looking back
that the news coverage of the killing
made the job with the defense very
difficult. I think it kind of handcuffed
them
because people had
an idea of what had happened.
There was so much put out there
uh beforehand
and it's when you get some when a person
gets something in their mind,
you know, they it's kind of hard to
change.
So when they heard all of the
discrepancies about the timing and the
weapon and the character of Charles
Sennet, it was hard for them to square
that with their understanding of John
Parker. He had agreed to go out to
Kundog Cemetery Road. He had admitted he
brutally assaulted Elizabeth Senate. A
dispassionate reading of the trial
transcripts today, years later, supports
the idea that Parker should have been
acquitted of the murder charge just
gotten something like conspiracy to
commit murder or assault in the first
degree. But this was a year after the
crime and it was very hard to be
dispassionate.
>> But I mean look
in that kind of situation
if you have he he meant to kill her with
that pipe.
I mean, if you mean to do something, you
may not actually be the one that
committed the death, the actual death,
but torturing somebody that bad was,
man,
it was awful, dude. If you if you're not
even if you're not the one that c that
was the one that fatally killed her,
you did you I mean it was proven that
you did every bit of that stuff to this
lady. I mean she might as well been
dead, but anyway.
Uh I don't know. It's just
I mean I I don't even like to think
about it too much. I don't know which
one of them killed her. I really don't.
But I think both of them got what they
probably deserved
uh
le legally
and morally.
They found Parker guilty of murder.
So Parker's attorney, Tom Heflin, lost
that round. But the prosecution was
asking for the death penalty. And here
the jury hesitated. The picture that
Heftlin had painted of his client as a
mixed up kid in over his head had left
an impression. So, the jury voted
overwhelmingly 10 to2 for life without
parole. The jury didn't think Parker
deserved to die.
>> I just don't think some of these people
that were on the jury, they didn't want
that to be on their conscience
the rest of their life, putting somebody
into the death penalty.
At this point, the cascade could have
stopped, right? A cascade is unique as a
category of catastrophe because it
requires multiple stages in sequence.
Remember our proverb from episode 1. You
need the nail, the shoe, the horse, the
rider, the message, and the battle for
the kingdom to be imperiled. And if any
of those stages fall out along the way,
if the rider loses his horse but quickly
finds another, the kingdom is fine. A
life sentence for Parker brings the
whole saga to a close because it means
that Kenny Smith would almost certainly
get a life sentence as well when his
time came and for all intents and
purposes the case would be closed.
Justice would be served. The rider found
another horse. The kingdom is just fine.
Except that's not what happens. Why?
Because this is Alabama.
To understand what happens next requires
a brief digression into an obscure legal
doctrine known as judicial override.
Judicial override arose in the mid 1970s
in response to the Supreme Court's
insistence that states be more rigorous
in the way they use the death penalty.
The court wanted standards, rules. So,
the court divided capital cases into two
stages. First, a jury was required to
rule on the defendant's guilt. Then, the
Supreme Court said it wanted juries to
do something they don't do in normal
criminal cases, decide on the
appropriate sentence.
Alabama's response was to pass the law
giving the final word to the judge. And
if the judge wanted to override the
jury's decision to turn, say, life
without parole into the death penalty,
they could. A handful of states did
something similar like Florida. But in
Florida, the law said that the judge had
to give quote great weight to the jury's
decision. In Alabama, a judge could do
whatever they wanted. And over the next
40 years, judges did just that.
The override was used over a hundred
times in Alabama, almost always to allow
a judge to execute someone whose life
the jury wanted to save. With judges
saying all kinds of crazy things along
the way, like the time an Alabama jury
went easy on a murderer because he was
mentally disabled and the judge overrode
them because, and I'm quoting, "The
sociological literature suggests gypsies
intentionally test low on standard IQ
tests."
So, in the Parker trial, the jury rules
in the first stage that he's guilty. And
in the sentencing stage, they say no
death penalty, life without parole. And
what happens next? The judge, Inca
Johnson, the one with the portrait on
the wall in the courtroom, overrides the
jury recommendation and sentences Parker
to death. Heflin was not exactly
surprised
when you heard her override decision.
Your reaction was
you saw it coming.
>> Saw it coming.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you um did she
>> I think she I think she I think she now
she's generally a good judge. I I I
think she listened. I think she, you
know, I'm not saying she had totally
prejudged it, but
>> u I think she,
>> you know, it
she doesn't give in her sentencing
decision.
She doesn't really give specific reasons
as to why she's overriding the jury's
recommendation.
>> In Alabama, you're not required to.
>> The whole thing makes no sense, of
course.
If the Supreme Court wanted the states
to make the application of the death
penalty less arbitrary, how does just
handing over power to judges to do
whatever they want for whatever random
reason fix the problem? Gary Highfield,
the jury foreman, is still angry about
it.
What reason did I have to spend a week,
over a week in a jury listening to this
when she has the right to overturn my
decision, our decision?
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, I felt like there was no reason
for me to even be there. That's the
problem I have with That's the only
problem I have with the whole thing. I
don't I I mean I just felt I felt
useless
spending all that time on a jury and
then she has the right to come back. I
mean, there's no sense in even having a
jury if you if you're going to be able
to overturn the jury. If a judge can
overturn the jury.
Parker gets sent to death row at
Donaldson Prison in Bessemer, Alabama,
just outside of Birmingham. This is
1989. His lawyers keep him alive, filing
appeal after appeal. 13 years pass. He's
still alive, and he gets one final
chance by way of a new Supreme Court
case. In Ring v. Arizona, the court
throws out Arizona's practice of
allowing judges to make sentencing
decisions independently of the jury in
death penalty cases. They said it
violates the Sixth Amendment, which
reads, in case you've forgotten, in all
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall
enjoy the right to a speedy and public
trial by an impartial jury. If your life
is at stake, then what happens to you
shouldn't be left up to the whims of
whatever judge you were assigned. Only a
jury should be allowed to make the call
of life or death, and that protection is
right there in the Constitution.
In response, Indiana, which had an
override statute on its books, shuts it
down. Everyone on death row in Indiana
who was there because of a judge's
override gets their original life
sentence back. All eyes turn to Alabama.
Surely they have to follow suit, right?
John Parker's going to live.
>> When I heard that it was done as John's,
my feeling was John was off death row.
>> This was 2002. For the next 8 years,
Parker got up every morning waiting for
the state of Alabama to acknowledge the
fact that the law that put him on death
row was unconstitutional. He waits and
waits. Do you know when Alabama finally
got around to abolishing judicial
override? 2017, when it was too late to
make any difference for Parker. In fact,
it took Alabama 41 years to come to
their senses. And even then, they
couldn't help themselves. They say this
reversal only applies to future cases.
Anyone who's already on death row
because of a judge's override in the
previous 42 years stays on death row.
In the years before the Civil War, there
was a phrase southern slave owners would
use to describe their practice of owning
their workforce. They called it their
peculiar institution, a euphemism. a
nice way of saying that things were done
a little differently in their part of
the world. Judicial override is, I
think, a very good example of another
Alabama peculiarity.
And if you are at all curious about how
this particular peculiarity works, I
would direct you to the discussion that
took place on April 17th, 2024 in a
hearing room at the Alabama State
Capital in Montgomery.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to welcome
you to the House Judiciary Committee. Uh
we're glad to have each and every one of
you here with us today.
>> Thank you, Mr. Chair. Members,
>> Mr. England, you want to talk about 27?
>> Uh, absolutely.
>> Representative England is Chris England,
that rarest of species in Alabama, a
Democrat, represents Tuscaloosa. He was
the co-sponsor of the legislation back
in 2017 that ended judicial override.
Now he wants to make an amendment to
that law, House Bill 27.
>> What this bill does or seeks to do is to
um make that application retroactive so
that I believe 33 individuals that are
currently sitting on death row as a
result of override
uh could be reentenced. Representative
England says, "We've all finally agreed
that judicial override violates the
constitutional right to a jury trial in
death bentley cases. So, we should go
back and restore the jury's decision in
the case of all those people who are
only on death row because it took us 40
years to realize that back in 1975 we
made a big mistake."
>> Mr. England, I hear what you're saying
and I understand that an individual
tried today would be would be subject to
a different set of laws and I've got
you. The individuals that were tried
prior to the time we changed the law
were subject to those
laws that were in effect at that time.
And the law that was in effect at that
time allowed judicial override and these
judges in their discretion overrode.
>> Then comes this priceless bit of
nonsense. Consequently, it's very
difficult for me to
secondguess or in effect override that
which the judge overrode
at this. There are lots of nods up and
down the committee. This is the Alabama
peculiarity. I have southern friends who
get mad correctly at the way northerners
always bring up slavery or get all
worked up because people drive around
with Confederate flags. But come on,
this isn't a random thing. This is a
characteristic. There is something in
the psyche of places like Alabama that
really really really doesn't want to
address the consequences of past moral
failures.
>> All right. Is there is there a motion to
give this bill a favorable report?
>> Thank you. And a second. Okay. We I
think we've had plenty of discussion.
You asked for a roll call. Go ahead,
Brandy.
>> Maybe you see where this is going. They
vote it down.
There will be no overriding of the
override.
It seems really clear to me that John
Forest Parker didn't kill Elizabeth
Senate. He was back home in Florence
when she received the stab wounds that
killed her. He should never been
convicted of murder. But he was. And if
he was going to be convicted, he should
have served out the sentence given to
him by a jury of his peers, life without
parole. But he didn't. And once he was
on death row, Alabama should have ended
the practice that robbed him of a just
result. But they didn't get around to it
for over 40 years. And even then, they
couldn't bring themselves to override
the override.
John Forest Parker never stood a chance.
[Music]
Next time on the Alabama Murders.
>> This is how lethal injection actually
kills you. It kills you by burning your
lungs up. So, the last thing that you
know you may know is that you're on fire
from the inside and the blood is filling
up your lungs as you die. Is this too
graphic?
>> Look.
if you come back here and you start
coming and these guys ask you to go all
the way with them, you got to be willing
to go. And I said, 'What's all the way?
And he said, you know, if they're
executions and if they ask you to be
with them, you need you can't you need
to be willing to go. And if you're not,
just don't come.
[Music]
Revisionist History is produced by Ben
Nadaf Hafrey, Lucy Sullivan, and Nina
Bird Lawrence. Additional reporting by
Ben Nadaf Hafrey and Lee Hedgepath. Our
editor is Karen Shukery. Factchecking by
Kate Furby. Our executive producer is
Jacob Smith. Engineering by Nina Bird
Lawrence. Production support from Luke
Lamond. Original scoring by Luis Gera
with Paul Brainard and Jimmy Ba. Sound
design and additional music by Jake
Gorski. I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
[Music]